# Extension Spring Alerts &nbsp; 

Alerts specific to extension springs. 

### On this page:   
 - [Force_1 > Force_2](alerts.html#F1_GT_F2)  
 - [Force_1 < Initial_Tension](alerts.html#F1_LT_IT)  
 - [Initial tension manufacturability concern; <br/>Stress_Initial < Stress_Init_Lo](alerts.html#SInit_LT_SInit_Lo)  
 - [Initial tension manufacturability concern; <br/>Stress_Initial > Stress_Init_Hi](alerts.html#SInit_GT_SInit_Hi)  
 - [Fatigue failure at end is possible](alerts.html#FatigueInHook)  
 - [Material property data not available](alerts.html#NoMatProp)  
 - [Default constraint not enabled](alerts.html#E_DefaultConstraint)  
 - [%_Safe_Deflect @ 1 < 20%](alerts.html#PC_Safe_Deflect1_LT_20)  

___

<a id="F1_GT_F2"></a>  
___

Alert entry #E201
## Force_1 > Force_2 
The force at operating point 1 (Force_1) is greater than the force at operating point 2 (Force_2). 

Extension spring forces are ordered from the smallest (free condition) to Force_1 to Force_2 to the largest (Max Safe). 
The [Extension Spring Force - Deflection Diagram](/docs/Help/DesignTypes/Spring/Extension/description.html#e_springFD_Diag) 
provides more detail on this point. 

Resolve this alert by reducing the value of Force_1 below the value of Force_2. 

It should also be possible to 
confirm that Force_1 is in Free status, 
confirm that the constraint L_Stroke MIN is enabled with a greater-than-zero constraint level 
and then use the Search feature (menu Action : Search or Search button). 

See also: 
 - [Extension Spring Constraints](/docs/Help/DesignTypes/Spring/Extension/description.html#e_springConstraints)   
 - [Errors](/docs/Help/errors.html)   

___

<a id="F1_LT_IT"></a>  
___

Alert entry #E202
## Force_1 < Initial_Tension 
In an extension spring, 
having the current value of Force_1 less than the current value of Initial_Tension 
is ambiguous.
Calculations for L_Stroke and Cycle_Life may not be valid. 

Where practical, change these values in the direction specified: 
Increase | &nbsp; | Decrease  
---      | ---    | ---  
 Force_1 | &nbsp; | Initial_Tension  

Alternatively, confirm that the Force_1 MIN constraint is set to the (FDCL) value of Initial_Tension 
and use the Search feature (menu Action : Search or Search button). 

See also: 
 - [Terminology - Function Constraints](/docs/Help/terminology.html#fdcl)  
 - [Constraints unique to extension springs](/docs/Help/DesignTypes/Spring/Extension/description.html#e_springConstraints)  
 - [Initial tension range](/docs/Help/DesignTypes/Spring/Extension/description.html#e_springIT_Range)  
 - [Errors](/docs/Help/errors.html)   

___

<a id="SInit_LT_SInit_Lo"></a>  
___

Alert entry #E203
## Initial tension manufacturability concern; Stress_Initial < Stress_Init_Lo 
The manufacture of springs with insufficient Initial_Tension is said to be "Difficult to control". 
This alert indicates that the current value of stress generated by initial tension (Stress_Initial) is below the lower limit 
indicated by Stress_Init_Lo. Increasing the value of Initial_Tension should clear the alert. 

Initial tension in an extension spring is limited by a number of factors. 
Beyond things like the material selection and heat treatment, 
the primary factors are spring index and the torsional stress caused by initial tension.

The Calculation input SI_Range provides user control over the default constraints on Stress_Initial. 
When set to "Readily_Obtainable" or "Special Request" and a known ferrous Material_Type is in use, 
the values of SI_Lo_Factor and SI_Hi_Factor are obtained from the built-in materials table. 
The software calculates the dependent variables Stress_Init_Lo and Stress_Init_Hi to form a range of attainable stress. 
These values are then applied as MIN and MAX constraints on Stress_Initial. 

Also, if the Stress_Init_Lo and Stress_Init_Hi constraints are in place, 
the Search feature will work to generate designs that fall within the preferred range of Initial_Tension.

Before finalizing a design that has this alert outstanding, 
check with the spring manufacturer regarding capabilities and costs. 

See also: 
 - [Initial tension range](/docs/Help/DesignTypes/Spring/Extension/description.html#e_springIT_Range)  
 - [Terminology - Function Constraints](/docs/Help/terminology.html#fdcl)  

___

<a id="SInit_GT_SInit_Hi"></a>  
___

Alert entry #E204
## Initial tension manufacturability concern; Stress_Initial > Stress_Init_Hi 
The manufacture of springs with high values of initial tension is said to be "Difficult to attain". 
This alert indicates that the current value of stress generated by initial tension (Stress_Initial) is above the upper limit 
indicated by Stress_Init_Hi. Decreasing the value of Initial_Tension should clear the alert. 

Initial tension in an extension spring is limited by a number of factors. 
Beyond things like the material selection and heat treatment, 
the primary factors are spring index and the torsional stress caused by initial tension.

The Calculation input SI_Range provides user control over the default constraints on Stress_Initial. 
When set to "Readily_Obtainable" or "Special Request" and a known ferrous Material_Type is in use, 
the values of SI_Lo_Factor and SI_Hi_Factor are obtained from the built-in materials table. 
The software calculates the dependent variables Stress_Init_Lo and Stress_Init_Hi to form a range of attainable stress. 
These values are then applied as MIN and MAX constraints on Stress_Initial. 

Also, if the Stress_Init_Lo and Stress_Init_Hi constraints are in place, 
the Search feature will work to generate designs that fall within the preferred range of Initial_Tension.

Before finalizing a design that has this alert outstanding, 
check with the spring manufacturer regarding capabilities and costs. 

See also: 
 - [Initial tension range](/docs/Help/DesignTypes/Spring/Extension/description.html#e_springIT_Range)  
 - [Terminology - Function Constraints](/docs/Help/terminology.html#fdcl)  

___

<a id="FatigueInHook"></a>  
___

Alert entry #E205
## Fatigue failure at end is possible 
Given the selected end type: 

 - bending stress in the hook at "point A" (Stress_Hook) exceeds the allowable bending stress (Stress_Lim_Bend) 

and / or 

 - torsional stress in the hook at "point B"  exceeds the allowable stress for the selected endurance (Stress_Lim_Endur).  

In order to clear this alert,
where practical, change one or more of these values in the direction specified. 
Increase  | &nbsp; | Decrease  
---       | ---    | ---  
 Wire_Dia | &nbsp; | Coil_Dia  
 FS_2     | &nbsp; | Force_2  
 FS_Hook  | &nbsp; | L_Stroke  
 &nbsp;   | &nbsp; | Spring_Index  

Alternatively, use Advanced View to enable the minimum constraint on FS_Hook with a constraint level of 1.0 or greater, 
enable the maximum constraint on Stress_Hook (defaults to the FDCL of Stress_Lim_Bend) 
and then use the Search feature (menu Action : Search or Search button). 
It will likely be necessary to clear some or most seemingly unrelated constraint violations in order to achieve 
no violation on the FS_Hook constraint (and thus achieve a design considered to be feasible). 

See also:
 - Report 2  
 - [Extension Spring Design Type - Hook Stress](/docs/Help/DesignTypes/Spring/Extension/description.html#e_springHookStress)  
 - [Extension spring cycle life](/docs/Help/DesignTypes/Spring/Extension/description.html#e_springCycleLife)  
 - [Terminology - Function Constraints (FDCL)](/docs/Help/terminology.html#fdcl)  

___

<a id="NoMatProp"></a>  
___

Alert entry #E206
## Material property data not available 
The material property data SI_Lo_Factor and SI_Hi_Factor necessary to compute an appropriate range for stress induced by
initial tension in non-ferrous materials is not in the internal material table. 

In order to clear this alert: 
 - disable constraints on Stress_Initial 
 
 or
 
 - in Advanced View, set the Calculation Input SI_Range to User_Specified and then supply appropriate (greater-than-zero) values for SI_Lo_Factor and SI_Hi_Factor  
 
It may be helpful to consult with the supplier of the non-ferrous material under consideration. 
 
See also:
 - [Extension spring initial tension range](/docs/Help/DesignTypes/Spring/Extension/description.html#e_springIT_Range)

___

<a id="E_DefaultConstraint"></a>  
___

Alert entry #E207
## Default constraint not enabled 
  
Disabling default constraints is not recommended. 
Adjust the constraint value instead. 

This alert is produced when constraints enabled by default are disabled. 
This alert can be also be produced for designs created and saved with older versions of the software. 
Specifically, constraints on Spring_Index were not enabled by default in older designs. 
If this alert is associated with Spring_Index on an older design, it may be ignored. 
Better yet, clear the alert by enabling MIN and MAX constraints on Spring_Index. 

The default constraints guide Search to "good" spring designs. 
The Seek and Trade features utilize Search internally and thus those results are also
guided by the default constraints. 

For example: 
 - Constraints on Spring_Index insure that designs produced by the software are within the range of manufacturability.
 For custom springs, consult your manufacturer regarding capabilities and costs. 
 - Disabling the lower (MIN) constraint on the first operating load (Force_1 MIN) 
allows Search to return a design that has Force_1 less than the initial tension and declare it to be "feasible". 
This situation is ambiguous. 
If this were to happen, calculations for L_Stroke and Cycle_Life may not be valid. 
 - Depending on the configuration of other constraints, 
disabling the upper (MAX) constraint on percent safe deflection at operating load point 2 (%_Safe_Deflect) 
might allow Search to return a design where the the second operating load (Force_2) exceeds the allowable stress 
for a static load (Stress_Lim_Stat) and declare it to be "feasible". 

In summary, while it may be reasonable to adjust the constraint values of a default constraint, 
disabling a default constraint entirely is not recommended. 

___

<a id="PC_Safe_Deflect1_LT_20"></a>  
___

Alert entry #E208
## %_Safe_Deflect @ 1 < 20% 
The first operating point (point 1) has less than 20% of maximum safe deflection. 
End effects and other factors may cause some inaccuracy in forces and deflections for this point.  

**Even if the application requires that this design operate outside the range of 20% to 80% of
available deflection, the inspection (acceptance) criteria should be specified within this range.** 

Helical coil compression, extension and torsion springs that have the properties of uniform pitch and cylindrical shape 
follow Hooke's Law in that they provide a nominally linear relationship between force and deflection. 
However, in the real world there are limitations. 

When extension springs are extended less than roughly 20% of safe deflection 
various factors such as deviation from perfect coil straightness (cylindrical form) and 
any lack of perfect form in the ends will become a factor in the real (as opposed to theoretical) force-deflection relationship. 
Thus when operating within the first 20% of the available deflection expect forces to be somewhat lower (or deflections to be somewhat greater)
than the linear behavior predicted by the equations.  

 See also: 
  - [Restrictions](/docs/About/Legal/Restrictions.html)  
  - [Hooke's law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hooke%27s_law)  

___

<a id="padding"></a>  
___

##  
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   
  
  &nbsp;   


 